The null hypothesis is that there will be no difference in students’ mental health scores when they are engaged in high social media usage, and when they are engaged in low social media usage.
The experimental hypothesis for this research proposal is that students will have a higher depression score when engaged in high social media usage, more than two and a half hours usage per day, than when engaged in low social media usage, less than two and a half hours usage per day. 
The independent variable is operationalised as ‘high social media usage’ and ‘low social media usage’.
The dependent variable is a mental health score.
To ensure rigorous and robust research I intend to employ the method outlined below to investigate the veracity of my hypothesis.
Local headteachers will be asked whether I can conduct research with Year 12 students aged 16-17. Once granted permission, I will present an assembly to the students, explaining my research regarding social media and mental health issues, and asking for volunteers to sign up and answer one initial question. I will continue until I receive 200 participants who have high social media usage.
The initial question is: ‘What is your average daily social media usage?’ (Appendix A).  This will determine the independent variable, as I will only be considering participants who have high social media usage.  
Ofcom (2022) published a report, based on their 2021 study, detailing information regarding the following platforms. The platforms listed, according to Ofcom (2021), are the most used social media platforms amongst 8-17 year-olds in the United Kingdom. I will specify to students that these platforms classify as social media for this study. 
·       YouTube
·       TikTok
·       Instagram
·       Snapchat
·       Facebook
·       Twitter
Identified high social media users will be asked to commit to participating in a six-month study. The initial steps will be repeated until a sample of 200 students has been obtained. This will constitute a volunteer sample.
Those committed to the study will be asked to complete the Beck Youth Inventories (BYI) (Beck, Beck, Jolly, & Steer, 2005) to baseline the participants’ mental health. The BYI is a self-reported instrument that elicits quantitative data for youth, ages 7 to 18 and is widely used in research and clinical settings (Beck et al., 2005). Wang & Gorenstein (2013) discuss the Beck Inventories stating that they are a ‘relevant psychometric instrument, showing high reliability…and structural validity’. The BYI is made up of five, 20-item scales. Each inventory contains 20 statements about thoughts, feelings and behaviours associated with emotional and social impairment in youth. 
The BYI enables assessment of levels of depression, anxiety, anger, disruptive behaviour, and self-concept – either separately, or in various combinations. Each scale takes approximately 5-10 minutes to complete which I felt was the optimum time to maintain engagement. 
After the BYI are completed, participants will then be asked to commit to lowering their social media usage to below two and a half hours per day for six months. An incentive of a £500 Amazon voucher will be offered.
After six months, participants will be asked the same initial question and complete the BYI. I will tell them that all will receive the £500 voucher irrespective of performance as responses may be skewed to obtain the reward. I will, however, discard the scores of any who failed. For this test to be generalizable I would need a minimum of 100 participants to have reduced their social media usage to below two and a half hours.
